chore: Files API handbook (#328)
botpress/documentation: pages/cloud/api-manual/files-api.mdx

# Files API

The Files API allows you to upload, download, and manage files and searchable documents for your bots and integrations in Botpress Cloud.

Files can be in any text or binary format, and documents (such as PDF, Microsoft Office, HTML, CSV, etc.) can be indexed to be used for semantic search in RAG (Retrieval Augmented Generation) implementations. Files are private by default but can be made publicly accessible through a permanent URL that's unique for each file.

## Getting Started

1. Get familiarized with the [API reference](/api-documentation/#files) and the different API endpoints available

2. Review the [instructions on how to authenticate](/api-documentation/#authentication) with the API.

## Examples

> ### Creating and uploading a file

Reviewer: Should we use capital `File` or lowercase `file` throughout the docs?

#### In an Execute Card in your bot

The following code snippet can be put in an Execute Card in your bot to create and upload a file that can be accessed by anyone with the file URL and that will be indexed for semantic search:

> Note: Make sure you have enabled the "Use the Botpress Client" setting in your bot's settings in Botpress Studio in order to have access to the `client` global variable, otherwise it will not be accessible and you'll get an error.

```javascript
const file = await client.createAndUploadFile({
  name: 'test.txt',
  content: 'This is a test file',

>   accessPolicies: ['public_content'], // Remove this line if you want the file to be private

Reviewer: Most people are going to copy-paste the first example they find to test. I suggest we make the first example as safe and cheap as possible. With that in mind, I would make the file private and non-indexed. We can introduce indexation and publicly-accessible files later in the tutorial.

Reviewer: I would in fact create 2 new paragraphs, `Creating an indexed file` and `Creating a public file` so we can introduce both concepts progressively.

Author: Agree

  index: true, // Remove this line if you don't want the file to be indexed
  tags: {

>     // Tags are optional but are useful for filtering files by a custom criteria you choose when using the "List Files" or "Search Files" API endpoints

Reviewer: I would remove the tags here and introduce them in the `Filtering by tags` section

    myTag2: 'value_2',
  },
})
```

Once the code above runs, the URL to download the file will be available in the `file.url` property.

By default the file URL returned will be temporary and change on each request to this endpoint, and will expire after a short period of time and thus should not be stored long-term, but if the file was created with a 'public_content' access policy then this URL will be permanent and can be stored long-term.

##### Uploading from an existing URL

Or if the file is already available in a URL and you want to download and then upload it to Botpress Cloud you can pass it in the `url` parameter instead of using the `content` parameter:

```javascript
const file = await client.createAndUploadFile({
  name: 'test.pdf',
  url: 'https://example.com/test.pdf',
  index: true,
})
```

##### Uploading a binary file

If you are dealing with a binary file such as a PDF or Microsoft Office document you can also pass a `Buffer` object as the `content` parameter for the file:

```javascript
const buffer = // This must be a Buffer object containing the binary content of the file

const file = await client.createAndUploadFile({
  name: 'test.pdf',
  content: buffer,

>   index: true,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Indexing should only be showcased in indexing-specific examples, otherwise people will copy-paste this code and incur unnecessary indexing fees.

Author: Good point

})
```

#### In a custom script using the Botpress Client

> If you're using Javascript or TypeScript the easiest way to interact with the API is using the [Botpress Client](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@botpress/client). You can install the client package by running the `npm install @botpress/client` command in your project.

Author: Yes. Just found the docs repo has a tabs component available through Nextra, so I'll use it for this so the 3 options don't take too much space.

I think I'll also use the tabs for the examples calling the API directly so they occupy less space. Will also allow us to show code examples in other languages (e.g. Python) later.

// Step 1: Create the file in Botpress Cloud.
// Please note that specifying the file size (in raw bytes, not characters) is required when calling this endpoint.
const res = await axios.post('https://api.botpress.cloud/v1/files', {
  name: 'test.txt',
  size: buffer.byteLength,
  headers: {
    Authorization: `Bearer ${process.env.BOTPRESS_PAT}`,
  },
})

// Step 2: Upload the file content to the unique upload URL provided for the created file.
await axios.put(res.data.file.uploadUrl, buffer, { maxBodyLength: Infinity })

// Optional - Step 3: You can call the "Get File" API endpoint to access the file details right away.
const { data: getFileResponse } = await axios.get(`https://api.botpress.cloud/v1/files/${res.data.file.id}`, {
  headers: {
    Authorization: `Bearer ${process.env.BOTPRESS_PAT}`,
  },
})

const fileUrl = getFileResponse.file.url // Will contain the public URL of the file if it was created with the 'public_content' access policy, otherwise it will contain a temporary pre-signed URL.
const fileStatus = getFileResponse.file.status // Should be 'indexing_pending' if the file was requested to be indexed, or 'upload_completed' otherwise.
```

> ### Getting the file's metadata

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Retrieving a File
```

Author: I think this could be confused with downloading the file, rather than just getting the metadata/details of the file which is what this endpoint does.

To get the details of a file you can use the "Get File" API endpoint. You can do this using the Botpress Client (replace `YOUR_FILE_ID` for the actual ID of your file):

```javascript
const file = await client.getFile('YOUR_FILE_ID')
```

> The above example is for an Execute Code card in your bot. If you're using the Botpress Client in a custom script be sure to install and import the client NPM package first and then instantiate the client with your Botpress PAT and bot ID.

Or by calling the API directly (using the Axios library in the example below):

```javascript
const res = await axios.get('https://api.botpress.cloud/v1/files/YOUR_FILE_ID', {
  headers: {
    Authorization: `Bearer ${process.env.BOTPRESS_PAT}`,
  },
})

const file = res.data.file
```

### Listing existing files of a bot

To list all the files of a bot you can use the "List Files" API endpoint. Here's an example using the Botpress Client:

```javascript
const res = await client.listFiles()
const files = res.data.files
```

> And here's an example calling the API directly using Axios:

Reviewer: I don't think we need examples using axios, since most people will use the client anyway.

Reviewer: Developers who don't use the client will know how to consume the API using their favorite client (fetch, axios, etc)

> And here's an example calling the API directly using Axios:

Reviewer: I think we should avoid showing examples using the HTTP API, since it forces us to be biased toward a specific http client lib (why axios? why not fetch or got?) out of all [the possible http clients](https://github.com/zeke/npm-collection-http-clients).

If customers want to use the HTTP API, they already have access to [the full API docs](https://botpress.com/docs/api-documentation/#introduction).

Author: I'd still show examples using the HTTP API, as many users might not be able to the use BP client for different reasons and we still want to make it as easy as possible for them to start using our API?

The examples might have to be in a specific language for now (JS) but showing some examples can illustrate the specifics of making the API requests manually in any language, such as passing the auth header, serializing and encoding the tags properly when searching files, etc.

However, I think it makes sense to not be biased to a non-official library, so maybe I can just rewrite the examples to use the native `fetch()` instead.

Reviewer: I think showing examples using `curl` would make them more generic, as `curl` is widely known across all tech stacks, and send a strong signal that the Files API can be used with any http client, in a language agnostic manner.

Otherwise, `fetch` seems like the 2nd best option, preferable to axios for sure.

```javascript
const res = await axios.get('https://api.botpress.cloud/v1/files', {
  headers: {
    Authorization: `Bearer ${process.env.BOTPRESS_PAT}`,
  },
})

const files = res.data.files
```

#### Filtering by tags

> If you need to filter files by tags, you can just pass the `tags` parameter which should be an object with key-value pairs of tags a file must have in order to be returned. For example:

Reviewer: We should explain that tags filtering works in a `AND` fashion. Only Files that have at least all the tags in the query will be returned.

```javascript
const res = await client.listFiles({
  tags: {

>     myTag1: 'value_1',

Reviewer: I think we should be creative and think of more real-world tags examples, rather than generic `myTag: value`. I like tags that have some semblance of a real use case (e.g. see [this article](https://www.cloudforecast.io/blog/terraform-s3-bucket-aws-tags/) for example).

Author: I find that case-specific tags or tags with proper names might lead less experienced users to think that those tags are somehow required, whereas tag names that are more obvious to be just examples might be less confusing as users will more easily realize they can just remove them from the copy/pasted code.

Reviewer: Maybe we can do a mix of both

  },
})
```

If you're making the HTTP request directly to the API please note that you'll need to pass the `tags` parameter as a JSON-serialized, URL-encoded string (the Botpress Client handles this automatically for you). Here's an example:

```javascript
const tags = {
  myTag1: 'value_1',
}

const res = await axios.get('https://api.botpress.cloud/v1/files?tags=' + encodeURIComponent(JSON.stringify(tags)), {
  headers: {
    Authorization: `Bearer ${process.env.BOTPRESS_PAT}`,
  },
})
```

#### Pagination

> The "List Files" API endpoint will only return the 20 most recent files your bot has. If you need to get more files you can use the `nextToken` property returned in the API response to get the next page (if any) of results. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "List Files" API endpoint will return the 20 most recent files your bot has. If you need to get more files you can use the `nextToken` property returned in the API response to get the next page (if any) of results. For example:
```

Author: Curious, why the word "only"?

Reviewer: `only` sounds diminutive, but I may be nitpicking

```javascript
let res = await client.listFiles()
const files = res.data.files

if (res.data.nextToken) {
  res = await client.listFiles({ nextToken: res.data.nextToken })
  files.push(...res.data.files)
}

// You can put this in a loop to get all the files if needed.
```

### Updating the file metadata

> Currently, only the access policies or tags of a file can be updated. The file content itself cannot be updated, but if you need to change the file content you can create a new file with the updated content and delete the old file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Access policies and tags of a file can be updated.
```

We should have a specific section explaining the strategy (create new, delete old) to update the content of a file.

Author: Sounds good, I'll remove that phrase and instead add a subsection titled "Updating a file" where it's detailed that the user needs to create a new file and delete the old one.

    myTag1: 'new_value_2', // This tag will be updated.
    myTag2: null, // This tag will be deleted.
    myNewTag: 'value_3', // This tag will be added.
    // Any other tags not specified here will remain unchanged.
  },
})
```

And here's an example calling the API directly using Axios:

```javascript
await axios.put(
  'https://api.botpress.cloud/v1/files/YOUR_FILE_ID',
  {
    accessPolicies: ['integrations'],
    tags: {
      myTag1: 'new_value_2',
      myTag2: null,
      myNewTag: 'value_3',
    },
  },
  {
    headers: {
      Authorization: `Bearer ${process.env.BOTPRESS_PAT}`,
    },
  }
)
```

### Deleting a file

To delete a file you can use the "Delete File" API endpoint. Here's an example using the Botpress Client:

```javascript
await client.deleteFile('YOUR_FILE_ID')
```

And here's an example calling the API directly using Axios:

```javascript
await axios.delete('https://api.botpress.cloud/v1/files/YOUR_FILE_ID', {
  headers: {
    Authorization: `Bearer ${process.env.BOTPRESS_PAT}`,
  },
})
```

### Searching files

> To run a semantic search on your bot's files you can use the "Search Files" API endpoint. This is particularly useful for RAG (Retrieval Augmented Generation) implementations.

Reviewer: We should explain how search is useful for RAG.

Author: I wrote an example for a simple RAG implementation but I haven't commited it yet as I want to first double check with Sly the implications of it.

Author: Added example here: https://github.com/botpress/documentation/pull/328/commits/3fa8f56c97d5954e28a95a83cb9db25fbb9907e6

> To run a semantic search on your bot's files you can use the "Search Files" API endpoint. This is particularly useful for RAG (Retrieval Augmented Generation) implementations.

Reviewer: link to Search Files in API docs

Here's an example using the Botpress Client:

```javascript
const res = await client.searchFiles({
  query: 'what are the most popular products of your company?', // This is the natural language query (e.g. a user's question) to be used for running a semantic search on the files of the bot.
  contextDepth: 1, // Optional (default: 0), allows you prepend and append the surrounding context to each matching passage in the search results
  tags: {
    // Optional, allows you to only search files that match the specified tags. Useful if you only want to search a subset of the bot's files.
    myTag1: 'value_1',
  },
  limit: 30, // Default is 20, maximum is 50 results
})

const passages = res.data.passages

for (const passage of passages) {
  // You can use passage.content here to retrieve the content (including surrounding context, if any) of each matching passage
}
```

You can check the [API reference](/api-documentation/#search-files) for the "Search Files" endpoint for more details on the properties available for each passage object returned in the response.

## Indexing

> - You can set the `index` parameter to `true` when creating a file so that the file is indexed for semantic search.

Reviewer: We should add a state machine chart explaining the various transitions

Author: I'd wait on this, as this will open a little can of worms where we'll have to explain the internal implementation and I think it might be too much detail at this point? At this stage I just want this piece of documentation to be as simple as possible for Botbassadors and initial users to start using the Files API and then wait for their feedback to improve and expand the documentation.

- The file it will initially have a status of "indexing_pending" and will be indexed asynchronously. The time it takes to index the file will depend on the file size and the current load on the system.
- You can check the status of the file by calling the ["Get File"](/api-documentation/#get-file) endpoint and checking that the `file.status` property has changed to "indexing_completed".
- If the indexing failed the status will be set to "indexing_failed" and the reason of the failure will be available in the `failedStatusReason` property of the file.
- The following file formats are supported for indexing: .pdf, .docx, .doc, .pptx, .ppt, .xlsx, .xls, .odt, .txt, .rtf, .csv, .html, .md, .epub, .eml, .msg

## Security

> - Files are scoped to a specific bot, which means that their ownership cannot be shared between bots. However, the file can be configured with a `public_content` access policy so it can be downloaded from anywhere.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Files are scoped to a specific bot. 
- Files can be configured with a `public_content` access policy so it can be downloaded from anywhere.
```
Good documentation states what the system can do, not what it cannot do.

Author: I'd argue good docuemntation also has explicitness on the limitations or restrictions in a system can be desirable because it's clear and doesn't leave room for questions? This might be clear for us as we developed the API, but might not be immediately clear to end-users specially if they're new to the platform or even to using an API.

Reviewer: It's best to leave these kinds of QnAs for the community. If some questions are asked often, we can update the docs or add a FAQ. For now, I would only state what the API can do.

- A bot has full permissions to access and manage all of its files, regardless of the user that created the file.

> - An integration has all permissions on the files that have been created by that integration for the bot they were running on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An integration has all permissions on the files that it creates on the current bot.
```

Author: I think "current bot" can be ambiguous as to what it exactly means? Maybe I can rephrase the last part to this:

```
- An integration has all permissions on the files that were created by that integration for the bot they are installed on.
```

- Workspace Members:

>   - Viewer: can read, search, and list all files for the bot, regardless of creator, but cannot create or delete files.

Reviewer: Idea: we could present a permission table here

  - Developer, Manager, and Administrator: have all permissions on the bot's files, regardless of creator.
  - Billing manager: no permissions on files.

> - The "List Files" API endpoint will filter out files that are not accessible to the user calling that API endpoint.

Reviewer: Add link to API docs for ListFile

### Access Policies

A file can have a list of special access policies:

- `public_content`: Unauthenticated users can read contents (but not metadata) of the file through a unique permanent URL provided by the API for each file. Without this policy the file URL returned by the API will be temporary and will expire after a short period of time.
- `integrations`: Grants read, search, list access to all integrations of the bot that owns the file.

## Pricing

> - There are 2 types of storage: file storage and vector storage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- There are 2 types of storage: File Storage and Vector DB Storage.
```

Let's use the same vocabulary as the Pricing page.

> - If a file isn't indexed, it will only consume file storage. If a file is indexed, it will consume BOTH file storage and vector storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- All files count toward your workspace's File Storage usage. Indexed files also count toward your workspace's Vector DB Storage usage.
```

> - 500 MB of file storage and 100 MB of vector storage are included for free in all accounts.

Reviewer: I would remove these 3 bullet points, as they repeat information that's already available in the pricing page. Simply linking to the pricing page (like you do on line 334) is good enough.

- Additional vector storage can be purchased at $10/month for 10 GB of additional file storage.

> - For additional file storage, the account can be upgraded to the [Team plan](https://botpress.com/pricing) which includes 10 GB of file storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For additional file storage, the account can be upgraded to the [Team plan](https://botpress.com/pricing).
```
It's best to avoid duplicating pricing information in the docs

> For more details on pricing please check our [Pricing page](https://botpress.com/pricing).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additional File Storage and Vector DB Storage quota can be purchased. For more details, check our [Pricing page](https://botpress.com/pricing).
```

Author: I'll rewrite this whole section to be more concise and just reference the pricing page as suggested.

## Quotas/Limits

- Maximum file size: 100 MB
- Rate limits: [same as all other endpoints](/cloud/getting-started/preventing-abuse/#rate-limits) of our public API
- Tags
  - Maximum number of tags per file: 50

>   - Minimum length of a tag name (key): 2 characters

Reviewer: Are the tag limitations already documented elsewhere in our docs? If so, we should link there and avoid repeating values.

Author: Just realized it's documented here: https://docs.botpress.cloud/docs/cloud/getting-started/platform-limits/

Will update to link to that page instead.
